docs: blog for the 1 billion row challenge (#8004)
ibis-project/ibis: docs/posts/1brc/index.qmd

https://github.com/gunnarmorling/1brc

```{.bash}
gh repo clone gunnarmorling/1brc
```

```{.bash}
cd 1brc/src/main/python
python create_measurements.py 1_000_000_000
```

```{.python}
import ibis
import polars as pl
import pyarrow as pa

#ibis.set_backend("polars")
#ibis.set_backend("duckdb")
ibis.set_backend("datafusion")
ibis.options.interactive = True
```

```{.python}
duckdb_kwargs = {
    "delim": ";",
    "header": False,
    "columns": {"station": "VARCHAR", "temperature": "DOUBLE"},
}

polars_kwargs = {
    "separator": ";",
    "has_header": False,
    "new_columns": ["station", "temperature"],
    "schema": {"station": pl.Utf8, "temperature": pl.Float64},
}

datafusion_kwargs = {
    "delimiter": ";",
    "has_header": False,
    "schema": pa.schema(
        [
            (
                "station",
                pa.string(),
            ),
            (
                "temperature",
                pa.float32(),
            ),
        ]
    ),
    "file_extension": ".txt",
}

clickhouse_kwargs = {
    "format": "CSV",
    "types": {"station": "String", "temperature": "Float64"},
}

# kwargs = duckdb_kwargs if ibis.get_backend().name == "duckdb" else polars_kwargs

> match ibis.get_backend().name:

Author: I think this is my first use of a match statement

con = ibis.connect("duckdb://data.ddb")

ROWS = 1_000_000_000

sql_str = ""
sql_str += "select\n"
for c in list(map(chr, range(ord("a"), ord("z") + 1))):
    sql_str += f"  random() as {c},\n"
sql_str += f"from generate_series(1, {ROWS})"

t = con.sql(sql_str)
con.create_table("billion", t, overwrite=True)
```

Nowadays I'd convert that to an Ibis expression:

:::{.callout-note}
This is a slightly different result with a monotonic index column, but I prefer
it anyway. You could drop that column or adjust the expression.
:::

```{.python}
import ibis

con = ibis.connect("duckdb://data.ddb")

ROWS = 1_000_000_000

t = (
    ibis.range(ROWS)
    .unnest()
    .name("index")
    .as_table()
    .mutate(**{c: ibis.random() for c in list(map(chr, range(ord("a"), ord("z") + 1)))})
)
con.create_table("billion", t, overwrite=True)
```

But if you do need to construct a programmatic SQL string, it's cool that you
can!

## Conclusion

While the one billion row challenge isn't a great benchmark, it's a fun way to
demonstrate how Ibis provides a single Python dataframe API to take the billion
row challenge with DuckDB, Polars, and DataFusion. Feel free to try it out with
other backends!

> Happy coding!

Reviewer: This should fix the linting issue https://github.com/ibis-project/ibis/actions/runs/7572830475/job/20623574885?pr=8004
```suggestion
Happy coding!

```

Author: yep just have to re-run to get the execution output, about to push

Author: also had to regenerate the data because I accidentally deleted it

---
title: "Using one Python dataframe API to take the billion row challenge with DuckDB, Polars, and DataFusion"
author: "Cody"
date: "2024-01-22"
categories:
    - blog
    - duckdb
    - polars
    - datafusion
---

## Overview

This is an implementation of the [The One Billion Row
Challenge](https://www.morling.dev/blog/one-billion-row-challenge/):

> Let’s kick off 2024 true coder style—​I’m excited to announce the One Billion
> Row Challenge (1BRC), running from Jan 1 until Jan 31.

> Your mission, should you decide to accept it, is deceptively simple: write a
> Java program for retrieving temperature measurement values from a text file and
> calculating the min, mean, and max temperature per weather station. There’s just
> one caveat: the file has 1,000,000,000 rows!

I haven't written Java since dropping a computer science course my second year
of college that forced us to do functional programming exclusively in Java.
However, I'll gladly take the challenge in Python using Ibis! In fact, I did
something like this (generating a billion rows with 26 columns of random numbers
and doing basic aggregations) to test out DuckDB and Polars.

> In this blog, we'll demonstrate how Ibis provides a single Python dataframe API
> to take the billion row challenge with DuckDB, Polars, and DataFusion.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
In this blog, we'll demonstrate how to use Ibis's unified Python dataframe API
to complete the billion row challenge with DuckDB, Polars, and DataFusion.
```
"take" sounded like the wrong word to me, I think? Just a suggestion.

Author: gonna leave as "taking the challenge" and have a clickbaity linkedin post

                pa.string(),
            ),
            (
                "temperature",
                pa.float64(),
            ),
        ]
    ),
    "file_extension": ".txt",
}
```

Let's define a function to run the same code with each backend to complete the challenge:

```{python}
def run_challenge(t):
    res = (
        t.group_by(ibis._.station)
        .agg(
            min_temp=ibis._.temperature.min(),
            mean_temp=ibis._.temperature.mean(),
            max_temp=ibis._.temperature.max(),
        )
        .order_by(ibis._.station.desc())
    )
    return res
```

### Completing the challenge

Let's complete the challenge with each backend.

:::{.callout-note}
The results are the same across backends but look suspicious. It is noted in the
repository that the Python generation code is "unofficial", so may have some
problems. Given this is a contrived example of generated data, I'm not going to
worry about it.

The point is that we can easily complete the challenge with the same code across
many backends, letting them worry about the details of execution. For this
reason, I'm also not providing execution times. Try it out yourself!
:::

::: {.panel-tabset}

> ## DuckDb

Author: arggghhhh thanks...rerendering for another 20 minutes 😂

---
title: "1 billion row challenge with Ibis and DuckDB"
author: ""
date: "2024-01-40"
categories:
    - blog
    - duckdb
---

## Overview

https://github.com/gunnarmorling/1brc

```{.bash}
gh repo clone gunnarmorling/1brc
```

```{.bash}
cd 1brc/src/main/python
python create_measurements.py 1_000_000_000
```

```{python}
import ibis

ibis.set_backend("polars")

ibis.options.interactive = True
```

```{python}
if ibis.get_backend().name == "duckdb":
    t = ibis.read_csv(
        "1brc/data/measurements.txt",
        delim=";",
        header=False,
        columns={"station": "VARCHAR", "temperature": "DOUBLE"},
    )

> elif ibis.get_backend().name == "polars":

Reviewer 3: Can you instead collect the kwargs into a dict and then have a single call to `ibis.read_csv`? It's pretty noisy with the repetition.

    t = ibis.read_csv(
        "1brc/data/measurements.txt",
        separator=";",
        has_header=False,
        new_columns=["station", "temperature"],
    )
t
```

```{python}

> t

Reviewer 3: You're already showing `t` in the previous block of code.

```

```{python}
f"{t.count().to_pandas():,}"
```

```{python}
import time

t1 = time.time()
res = (
    t.group_by(ibis._.station)
    .agg(
        min_temp=ibis._.temperature.min(),
        mean_temp=ibis._.temperature.mean(),

>         max_temp=ibis._.temperature.max(),

Reviewer 3: good place to show off selectors:

```
.agg(s.across(_.temp, {"min": _.min(), "mean": _.mean(), "max": _.max()}))
```

Author: not sure I've written this correctly but getting an error:

```
TypeError                                 Traceback (most recent call last)
[/Users/cody/repos/ibis/docs/posts/1brc/index.qmd](https://file+.vscode-resource.vscode-cdn.net/Users/cody/repos/ibis/docs/posts/1brc/index.qmd) in line 6
      [288](file:///Users/cody/repos/ibis/docs/posts/1brc/index.qmd?line=287) t = ibis.read_csv("1brc/data/measurements.txt", **kwargs)
      [289](file:///Users/cody/repos/ibis/docs/posts/1brc/index.qmd?line=288) res = (
      [290](file:///Users/cody/repos/ibis/docs/posts/1brc/index.qmd?line=289)     t
      [291](file:///Users/cody/repos/ibis/docs/posts/1brc/index.qmd?line=290)     .group_by(ibis._.station)
      [292](file:///Users/cody/repos/ibis/docs/posts/1brc/index.qmd?line=291)     .agg(
----> [293](file:///Users/cody/repos/ibis/docs/posts/1brc/index.qmd?line=292)         s.across(
      [294](file:///Users/cody/repos/ibis/docs/posts/1brc/index.qmd?line=293)             ibis._.temperature,
      [295](file:///Users/cody/repos/ibis/docs/posts/1brc/index.qmd?line=294)             {
      [296](file:///Users/cody/repos/ibis/docs/posts/1brc/index.qmd?line=295)                 "min": ibis._.min(),
     [297](file:///Users/cody/repos/ibis/docs/posts/1brc/index.qmd?line=296)                 "mean": ibis._.mean(),
     [298](file:///Users/cody/repos/ibis/docs/posts/1brc/index.qmd?line=297)                 "max": ibis._.max(),
     [299](file:///Users/cody/repos/ibis/docs/posts/1brc/index.qmd?line=298)             },
     [300](file:///Users/cody/repos/ibis/docs/posts/1brc/index.qmd?line=299)         )
     [301](file:///Users/cody/repos/ibis/docs/posts/1brc/index.qmd?line=300)     )
     [302](file:///Users/cody/repos/ibis/docs/posts/1brc/index.qmd?line=301)     .order_by(ibis._.station.desc())
     [303](file:///Users/cody/repos/ibis/docs/posts/1brc/index.qmd?line=302) )
     [305](file:///Users/cody/repos/ibis/docs/posts/1brc/index.qmd?line=304) res

File [~/repos/ibis/ibis/selectors.py:498](https://file+.vscode-resource.vscode-cdn.net/Users/cody/repos/ibis/~/repos/ibis/ibis/selectors.py:498), in across(selector, func, names)
    [496](file:///Users/cody/repos/ibis/ibis/selectors.py?line=495) funcs = dict(func if isinstance(func, Mapping) else {None: func})
    [497](file:///Users/cody/repos/ibis/ibis/selectors.py?line=496) if not isinstance(selector, Selector):
--> [498](file:///Users/cody/repos/ibis/ibis/selectors.py?line=497)     selector = c(*util.promote_list(selector))
...
--> [396](file:///Users/cody/repos/ibis/ibis/selectors.py?line=395)     names = frozenset(col if isinstance(col, str) else col.get_name() for col in names)
    [398](file:///Users/cody/repos/ibis/ibis/selectors.py?line=397)     def func(col: ir.Value) -> bool:
    [399](file:///Users/cody/repos/ibis/ibis/selectors.py?line=398)         schema = col.op().table.schema

TypeError: unhashable type: 'Deferred'
```
